THE GREAT ASTRONOMICAL DISCOVERIES of the sixteenth century initiated a turning point in the intellectual history of the West. At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the concept of man's existence within an orderly universe appears to have been losing ground. Writers and preachers were indulging what may be called a cosmology of corruption.' The universe seemed to have lost all harmony and stability. Mutability extended from the earth to the heavens and man was lost in an incoherent world. 

It was Pascal who drew the philosophical consequences from the impact of the "new philosophy" of nature upon the condition of man. He reset, as it were, the compass of Christian faith in accordance with a changed universe. His existential pathos and his insight into the human condition can, therefore, neither be reduced to the non-Christian perspective of contemporary existentialism, nor can they be separated from the conception of the universe. To understand existentialism historically as well as systematically, we have to refer to the new concept of an infinite universe which seems at first to be the farthest removed from any immediate existential concern of a self with itself. It is my thesis here that we "exist" (in the sense of existentialism) because We are lost in the universe of modern natural science. This Was clearly realized by Pascal, but not by Kierkegaard and his followers. 

For Kierkegaard, existence is the only "interest" of relevant thinking; it is the inter-esse between theoretical thought and reality, that on which theoretical metaphysics necessarily is  stranded. Existence as such is, to use Schelling's term, "unfore-thinkable and yet the only serious interest of an existing thinker. ‘Irritated by this inexplicable fact of the Contingency of our existence , Kierkegaard advances the questions: "Who am I? How came I here, What is this thing called the World? ... Why was I not consulted ? ...  How did I obtain an interest in this big enterprise the call reality? And if I am Compelled to take part in it, where is the director? I should like to make a remark to him."

 Almost the same question was raised two Centuries earlier by Pascal

when I consider the short duration of my life, swallowed up in the eternity before and after, the little space which I fill ... , cast into the infinite immensity of spaces of which I am ignorant and which know me not, I am frightened, and shocked at being here rather than there; for there is no reason why here rather than there, why now rather than then. Who has put here? By whose order and direction have this place and time been allotted to me?

 In spite of the resemblance of Pascal's last sentence to Kierkegaard's sarcastic exclamations, there is a distinct difference of tone and intention. With Pascal, the frightful contingency of man's existence is apprehended within a definite frame of reference: the spatial and temporal infinites of the physical universe. For Pascal, the world is not a "big enterprise," but the majestic and overwhelming reality of the physical universe. With Kierkegaard and the existentialists, this physical universe, as conceived by modem natural science, is absent, or more precisely, it is present only as the insignificant background of man's forlorn existence. Insignificant as this background seems to be existentially, it is the reverse of existence as understood by existentialism.

 The "world" which Sartre, Heidegger, and Kierkegaard describe and analyze concretely is neither a living cosmos nor a creation, nor is it the universe of mathematical physics. It is our world of selfhood and interhuman relations within an anonymous mass-society—it is a world without nature. With Sartre, nature is an opaque en-soi, over against the pour-soi of human existence, and accessible only in the natural appetites of the human body. In Heidegger, nature is subsumed under the lowest category of the merely "extant" [Vorhandensein], in distinction to the human Dasein which alone can exist and have a world. Neither the social world nor the natural world can relieve us of the necessity of taking over the sheer "factuality" of Our contingent existence, of "being cast" into the world. 

Kierkegaard is exclusively concerned with man's inner life. He resumes Augustine's quest for the soul and its relation to God as the only two things worth knowing. He thereby implicitly dis-pagan curiosity. A sentence like that of Anaxagoras misses the classical concern with the logos of the cosmos as a end for which man is born is the contemplation of the sun, the moon, and the sky, is utterly strange to Kierkegaard and his followers. It is equally strange to those of us who, unencumbered by a god or a soul, but clothed in psychology and psychoanalysis are living on the capital of the Christian concern for man's soul. Confronted with the task of recapturing a Christian existence according to the law of the Gospel, Kierkegaard felt that he bad to ignore the laws of the cosmos and the modern discoveries of the telescope. If Christ appeared today, he said, the Christian, task of appropriating His message would still be the same as it was for the first generation of Christians. But the natural scientist and all those who believe in the truth of science rather than of the Gospel, would demand an examination of Christ's brain under a microscope to determine whether He is the Son of God or a schizophrenic. Unfortunately for the sciences, all the modern discoveries by telescope and microscope are irrelevant for an understanding of the human condition in its inwardness. A thoughtful person, according to Kierkegaard, who wants to under-stand what it means to exist as a self before God cannot be interested in natural science; for it does not make any difference for man's moral choices and religious decisions whether the moon is made of blue cheese or something else. What is the use of explaining the whole physical universe or world history if one does not understand oneself, one's own single self? As an existing self, man is singled out from the physical cosmos and world history and their deceptive greatness. To Kierkegaard the concern with six thousand years of world history, or with some billion years of cosmic history, is an escape from one's self into an illusory importance. 

Thus, if anything unites these philosophies of existence by a common pattern it is the negative experience that man has no definite place and nature within the natural universe. This meta-physical displacement is, however, not a novelty of the mended! century, but rather the modem destiny. "Since Copernicus, Nietzsche said, "man is falling from a center toward an x." This universal destiny is aggravated by man's social solitariness amid a modern mass-society.

Neither classical philosophy nor Christian theology saw man's position in the universe in this Way. For Aristotle, existence as such was an unquestioned element within the essen sturcture, order, and beauty of an imperishable and clearly delimited cosmos which included the existence of rational animals called men. As an animal, man shared Properties of living things; as a rational animal he had privilege of contemplating this; perfect hierarchy of beings. For St man and the universe were contingent existences, but Thom i anh ga e t to God and bound together by the act of creation. apart iman alone was created in the likeness of God, and this set au and above the ani-mal world, the unified Christian concept worked for man and world alike. Only with the dissolution of these an ietont. cow coons clas-sic and Christian, did existentialism come into own. Por if the universe is neither eternal and divine has it w as mar contingent but created (as it was for St Tho: Ansatontipii nun has no definite place and status in the hier.archy oafs2n'utecternaal a stz or created cosmos, then he begins to "exist" in it like an o an "ecstatic" condition. And since none of us is exempt from impact of the dissolution of these ancient beliefs andcertainties since weertainties, cannot restore the universe of Aristotle or St. Thomas) 5 even less the post-Cartesian synthesis of Hegel, we are all "exis-tentialists" whether we like it or not. It is not a "failure of nerve" (as has been suggested) which brought existentialism into exist-ence. What failed us was not our nerve, but rather our belief in a divinely ordered universe in which man could feel himself at home, or chez soi, as it were. No social order of whatever kind, not even order plus freedom, can possibly make up for that lack of fundamental order in the universe. Hence, we have indeed "to be," or exist, in all those descriptive tax s of sheer factuality, contingency, and absurdity which existentialism has brought to light. For how can one feel at home in an "exploding" universe, the chance result of statistical probabilities? Such a universe can-not inspire confidence and sympathy, nor can it give orientation and meaning to man's edstence in it We are indeed cast into this world and therefore must postulate ourselves, having postu-lated such a universe with such unexpected success. It is the character of our world and world concept which makes us exist existentially. What as us uncomfortable and throws us back upon our-selves is that our modem universe has no center and no limits. As alarl fitfiitnite universe of indefinite limits, it has no definite place the world e man. If infinity has to be included in the image .of , the point is reached where every image ends the point of the nebulae of astrophysics, those scattered fragments of art initial explosion a hundred million light-years distant from gird the important changes which, since Newtol;. We can disre have occurred in mathematical physics, for rthe world has no: become again an encompassable world-order. Einstein's conception' of "finite" space, and the assumption that beyond certain limits the concepts of space and time cease to be applicable, by no means restore the universe as an imaginable her for thenetristealcul Such a universe can perhaps still be described, or rather lated, but it Can no longer be imagined; and the s who calculates it does not live in it as a human person.2 "Infinity" is a tenn which was at first applied not to the physical universe but was reserved for its creator The natural scientist of early modern times considered infinity to be an attribute of Cod. Thus, when Copernicus and Kepler studied the structure of the planetary system, they believed that they were finding the spirit of God in the mathematical laws of nature. When Newton explained Kepler's laws in terms of mechanics, it was held that the world could be explained in purely physical terms. What still defied mechanical explanation was the origin of the planetary sys-tem. But when Laplace rendered its mechanical origin probable, thus confirming the cosmological theory of Kant, be declined to speak of God and to involve practical moral reason, while theoreti. cal reason, the understanding of nature, needed, as he said, only some matter to construct the physical world on a few principles invested in man's reason. But pant's "Copernican revolution" was already initiated by Descartes' distinction of man and world as res cogitans and res extensai Consequently the modern consciousness is a profoundly divided one. It lives in two different worlds of extreme subjectivity and objectivity, worlds which are as opposed to each other as they are interdependent. In a famous passage at the end of his Critique of Practical Reason, Kant formulates it this way: Two things the rand with ever new and increasing admiration and awe, the oftener and the more steadily we reflect on them: the starry heav-ens above us and the moral law within us. I see them before me and connect them directly with the consciousness of my existence. The former begins from the place I occupy in the external world of sense, and enlarges my Connection therein to an unbounded extent with worlds upon and systems of systems, and moreover into limitless times of their periodic motion its beginning my personality, ariel and continuance. 'the / 107 met second begins from my in,. i sib le self, finity but which is traceable y h 4 ersetoann nri 0 a with eixhbibyit: anx not in a rnerel which discern that I rindctg.:as:rud cue in.. Objectively, the two vvorlds are strictly separate: the universe natural man is nothing; in in the face of consciousness, as a Person, he is ail-imp rela ro ortant yloarTinegrafreniawnot d.rld whIch He realizes, ,ire Reason, Kant goes even further. tlinntht: I k 17 s rrnadoeircoaa existentialist, the impossibility of establishing the inner necessity of th w e ho w le creation, for to establish itt e would have to k now that there is an ultimate principle of existence which exists neces-sarily or essentially. But we cannot conceive of any existence, existing, as the ultimate cause of not even of God, y od, as necessaril contingent  exzteces. That unconditioned necessity, which we require as the last support of all things, is the true abyss of human reason. . . We cannot put off the thought, nor can we support it, that a Being, which. we represent to ourselves as the highest among all possible beings, should say to himself: A ani f-Torn eternity to eternity, there is nothing beside me, except that which, is something through my will—but whence am I? Here ail sinks away from under us, and the highest perfection, like the smallest, passes without support before the eyes of speculative reason, which finds no difficulty in making the one as well as the other to disappear without the slightest impediment. What remains is radical, universal contingency of existence, or existence "without support." Such a thought is, however' "intoler-able" for human reason; while its opposite, inner necessity, is "undemonstrable" for it. The difference between Kant and con-temporary existentialists is that the latter apparently have man-aged to find radical contingency tolerable and even liberating, and the demonstrability of an inherent necessity of existence to be unnecessary. It is not difficult to imagine where Kant's admiration of the starry heavens above us and the moral law within us might lead. It needs only a slight shift in temper, from awe and admiration. to a neutral recognition; and from there to a positivistic acceptance of the "findings" of the telescope on the one hand, and of the Fr su eudian "perego" on the other, to circumscribe what is now commonly held to be man's position in the universe. For some People, the only 1ink which still connects the firmament with humanity is the horoscope. If this disproportion between man and the universe is not always clearly felt, it is due to our n obsessio w with the immediate problems of our social orld and to the m m  fusion of the natural universe with our scientific construction of it, which is indeed ours and not contrived by th To understand this disproportion correctly± essential disorder—I refer now to Pascal as the 144111d P Pim 1.0( g 'in of the modern age. 
traditional certainties, in order to reach a Their common starting point was a radical doubt ivvr9ekunt"0/1:1 that the order of the scholastic system Pascal and Ms older contemporary, Descarteei pascal ter tertai Th bad hec(.; w kind Descartes believed himself to have attained the 11°1 as'uNfiu! Descartes' doubt still superficial and also, consequently; beyond any doubt, by radical reasoning. gaard and Nietzsche felt after him, that t, as Kierk the certaint  hvy'i,i(' had extracted from it. According to Pascal, onlY the Ye whk faith can counterbalance the fundamental douhtfultlevrtainit',%n human being and knowing, including the knovviedg-e ;sis. 1)-1 dtihr stract sciences. For the ultimate axioms of mathematic the ari"Ql-evident as they are undemonstrable. "It may be that there arc ;01 true demonstrations; but this is not certain. Thus, this('rnehar-only that it is not certain that all is uncertain"—Which testifies —ryes once more to the "glory of skepticism." The master of bothstnifies of dogmatic certainties, while enjoying the superior refinement s was Montaigne; but he was satisfied with undermining all kinds cartes and Pascal, who stimulated in them the sense of skepticism, skeptical suspense. In our doctrinaire age, where people long for guidance, secu-rity, and constructive results, skepticism has fallen into disrepute. The deprecator of skepticism has forgotten, however, that genuine skepticism (which means, literally, keen observation and investi-gation) is the result of a radical search for truth. Only by the highest standard of tmth, whether attainable or not, can one realize the doubtfulness and the illusions of our human judg-ments. The degree to which Descartes' and Pascal's doubt is radi-cal, therefore, is in direct proportion to the rigor of their quest for certain truth. Descartes is striving for absolute certainty by means of his doubt; Pascal erects religious faith on the "truth of skep-ticism." The never-failing spring from which Pascal drew his skep-ticism was the study of man on the pattern of Montaigne; but he probed much deeper than his master into the ultimate ground oof. man's uncertainties, illusions, and contradictions. The two site and extreme standards by which his skepticism has to be judged are the lawful certaint of mathematical on the one hand, and the fleeting certainty of la demonstration on the other. 

Thus; the wealth and utra, of his szars moralistic obser s and reflections, the r ae12.---"ess °f. Pa 10:ation ha_ve to be intr-preted within the coriatil."'e nfeiiifienatnis't and the believer. Pascal combined in"liht:safpePrassoenalt'htel)legljes of a profoundspmus of a, creative mathe-matician. with the insi _;Ditralifst and Christian believer, or to use his goll p ir nvenspe) 5geomdetry" wits the "spirit of subtle intuil-T1 t.er(messi " haen habdothth natural scientist, the "reason of the heartr"h).Arl" xth tellectual superiority of knosvia th,e kind of woxld into \NeThiin'h-we are cast. As a keen moralnit Ian-A-liar with the habits and passions of the men of the world' the grand style, he had the social superiority of the honnete 1-2.1(-7 As a Christian bet-level of a mairsmitsines;1. experence, who had suffered the joy he had the inland renunciation over spiritual superiority of radical su that of a masteling sci-all those whose experience is confined entist  and a skeptical moralist. But even inoralist and be-liever, Pascal was informed by the soberinas' "spirit of geometry." The piece of paper on which be had jotted 'own. his mystical ex-perience relates it with the precision of a. scientific obsenier; and in the Pensees, the rationality of faith is ,dernonstyated in the famous fragment on the theory of probabilities. Pascal defines man by outlining his definite limits. Since man is not merely a corporeal being with definite and definable proper-ties, but exists consciously and thus surpasses himself, human nature has to be defined in terms of the "human condition." Pas-cars basic definition of it at first seems purely formal and external. He defines it in terms of mathematical limits. Man is a "seeming mean" between the two mathematica1 infinities, the infinitely great and the infinitely small, the Infinite and the Nothing of spatial and temporal extension. Or, to use an arithmetical analogy, man exists like a zero between an ever increasing and an ever decreas-ing series of numbers. The zero itself is not a number like other numbers, but qualitatively different The infinitely great and the infinitely small in number, space, and time) are similar to each other, but are dissimilar to the finite standpoint from which they am judged as infinite. This position between two horizons of infinity is to Pascal analogous to the condition of man_ within th5, universe. Man exists between two fathomless inanites or "abysses. Between two such precipices, however, man has no definable standpoint, but rather his position is "floating," His position is the a "seeming rnean" between the All and the Nothin. condition of  It is man's condition to be "Nothing in comparison with the in-finite, an All in comparison With the Nothing." 

The word "condition," therefore, does not have the sa, meaning as in the popular phrase of "being conditioned" scieritl cally, socially, psychologically, and so forth. What Pascal has mind is not particular conditions which determine maxi's rarc4 of freedom, but the total and unique situation of man with! the whole of being, something which is quite independent of t11111 question of determinism and free will. Pascal's definition. is an ate tempt to locate man, to assign him his correct place within tile" universe. But this place turns out to be nowhere and everywhere' This condition in the universe outside us is at the same tirri analogous to man's inner condition, Man is suspended, not Only between the two mathematical infinities of the infinitely great and the infinitely small, but he is also extended and suspended between greatness and misery. In bare outline, this is the human condition sketched in frag-ment No. 72 of the Pensees, which opens a section on "Man," Though editors have improved the context of Pascal's thought by rearranging the 924 fragments of the Pensees, this work remains, like Nietzsche's last work, a disorderly mass of notes which Pascal had jotted down during the last years of his short life with the intention of defending the Christian faith against the sophisticated gentlemen of his time It is a modem apology because it applies the infinite horizon of modern science to the elucidation of the condition of man. The arguments lead up to the crucial point where man has to find for himself the answer to those questions which are involved in his essential displacement, his being Egare, bewildered, and gone astray. In a note which can be considered as a preface to the section on "Man," Pascal states that he had spent much time in the study of the abstract sciences but had been disheartened by the small number of fellow students with who he could converse about these difficult matters. Thus he turned, like Descartes, to the study of man. But he found that still fewer studied man than studied geometry, for a serious study of roan is even more exact-ing and solitary than that of the abstract sciences. To study the human condition correctly, one has to relate it to the condluon of the universe, because it is the very disproportion between man and universe which reveals the true condition of man. Under the title "Disproportion," Pascal elaborates on the human condition thus: 
pLet man then contemplate the whole of nature in her full and gra.nd majesty, and turn his vision from the low objects which surround him. Let him gaze on that brilliant light, set - like an eternal lamjp in. the universe; let the earth appear to him a 16,,,i,. , to illumine zzarfiascotntwhaitthththise vvaasstt circle described by the sun; and let hirnc:VQ: circle is itself but a very fine Point in firmparison with that described by the stars in their revolution rou madment. But if our view be ar-ndpatshse besytioni ;. it will sooner exhaust the rested there, let our imagination power of conception than nature that of imperceptPibPlYing material for conception. The whole visible world is only an we may enlargeeatorn in the ample bosom of nature. No idea approaches it. our conceptions beyond all imaginable space; we only produce atoms in comparison with the reality of things. It is an infinite sphere, the center of which is everywhere, the circumference nowhere. . . . Returning to himself, let man consider what he is • comparison with all existence; let him regard himself as lost in this remote corner of nature; and from the little cell in which he finds himself lodged, I mean the uni-verse, let him estimate at their true value the earth, kingdoms, cities, and himself. What is a man in the infinite? But to show him another prodigy equally astonishing, let him examine the most delicate things he knows. Let a mite be given him, with its minute body and parts incomparably more minute, limbs with their joints, veins in the limbs, blood in the veins, humours in the blood, drops in the humours, vapours in the drops. Dividing these last things again, let him exhaust his powers of conception, and let the last object at which he can arrive be now that of our discourse. Perhaps he will think that here is the smallest point in nature. I will let him see therein a new abyss. I will paint for him not only the visible universe, but all that he can conceive of nature's immensity in the womb of this abridged atom. Let him see therein an infinity of uni-verses, each of which has its firmament, its planets, its earth, in the same proportion as in the visible world; . .. Let him lose himself in wonders as amazing in their littleness as the others in their vastness. For who will not be astounded by the fact that our body, which a little while ago was im-perceptible in the universe, itself imperceptible in the bosom of the whole, is now a colossus, a world, or rather a whole, in respect of the nothingness which we cannot reach? He who regards himself in this light will be afraid of himself, and observing himself sustained . .. will tremble at the sight of these marvels. . . . For in fact what is man in nature? A Nothing in comparison with the Infinite, an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing and everything. Since he is infinitely removed from comprehending the extremes, the end of things and their beginning are hopelessly hidden from him in an impenetrable secret. . . . Through failure to contemplate these Infinities men have rashly rushed into the examination of nature, as though they boxy some proportion to her. It is strange that they have wished to understand the beginnings (principles) of things, and thence to arrive at the knowledge of the whole, with a presumption as infinite as their object. For surely this design cannot be formed without presun-iption or without a capacity infinite like nature...

 



